You've seen how using momentum
can speed up gradient descent.
There's another algorithm called RMSprop,
which stands for root mean square prop,
that can also speed up gradient descent.
Let's see how it works.
Recall our example from before,
that if you implement gradient descent,
you can end up with huge oscillations
in the vertical direction,
even while it's trying to make
progress in the horizontal direction.
In order to provide intuition for
this example, let's say that
the vertical axis is the parameter b and
horizontal axis is the parameter w.
It could be w1 and w2 where some of
the center parameters was named as b and
w for the sake of intuition.
And so, you want to slow down
the learning in the b direction, or
in the vertical direction.
And speed up learning, or at least not
slow it down in the horizontal direction.
So this is what the RMSprop
algorithm does to accomplish this.
On iteration t, it will compute
as usual the derivative dW,
db on the current mini-batch.
So I was going to keep this
exponentially weighted average.
Instead of VdW,
I'm going to use the new notation SdW.
So SdW is equal to beta
times their previous
value + 1- beta times dW squared.
Sometimes [INAUDIBLE]
as dW squared.
So for clarity, this squaring operation
is an element-wise squaring operation.
So what this is doing is really
keeping an exponentially weighted
average of the squares of the derivatives.
And similarly, we also have Sdb equals
beta Sdb + 1- beta, db squared.
And again,
the squaring is an element-wise operation.
Next, RMSprop then updates
the parameters as follows.
W gets updated as W minus
the learning rate, and
whereas previously we had alpha times dW,
now it's
dW divided by square root of SdW.
And b gets updated as b minus
the learning rate times,
instead of just the gradient, this is
also divided by, now divided by Sdb.
So let's gain some intuition
about how this works.
Recall that in the horizontal direction or
in this example, in the W direction
we want learning to go pretty fast.
Whereas in the vertical direction or
in this example in the b direction,
we want to slow down all the oscillations
into the vertical direction.
So with this terms SdW an Sdb,
what we're hoping is that SdW
will be relatively small,
so that here we're dividing
by relatively small number.
Whereas Sdb will be relatively large, so
that here we're dividing yt relatively
large number in order to slow down
the updates on a vertical dimension.
And indeed if you look at the derivatives,
these derivatives are much
larger in the vertical direction
than in the horizontal direction.
So the slope is very large
in the b direction, right?
So with derivatives like this, this is
a very large db and a relatively small dw.
Because the function is sloped much more
steeply in the vertical direction than as
in the b direction, than in the w
direction, than in horizontal direction.
And so,
db squared will be relatively large.
So Sdb will relatively large, whereas
compared to that dW will be smaller,
or dW squared will be smaller,
and so SdW will be smaller.
So the net effect of this is that your
up days in the vertical direction
are divided by a much larger number, and
so that helps damp out the oscillations.
Whereas the updates in the horizontal
direction are divided by a smaller number.
So the net impact of using RMSprop
is that your updates will end
up looking more like this.
That your updates in the, Vertical
direction and then horizontal
direction you can keep going.
And one effect of this is also that you
can therefore use a larger learning rate
alpha, and get faster learning without
diverging in the vertical direction.
Now just for the sake of clarity,
I've been calling the vertical and
horizontal directions b and
w, just to illustrate this.
In practice, you're in a very high
dimensional space of parameters,
so maybe the vertical dimensions
where you're trying to damp
the oscillation is a sum set
of parameters, w1, w2, w17.
And the horizontal dimensions might be w3,
w4 and so on, right?.
And so, the separation there's
a WMP is just an illustration.
In practice, dW is a very
high-dimensional parameter vector.
Db is also very high-dimensional
parameter vector, but
your intuition is that in dimensions
where you're getting these oscillations,
you end up computing a larger sum.
A weighted average for
these squares and derivatives, and so
you end up dumping ] out the directions
in which there are these oscillations.
So that's RMSprop, and it stands for
root mean squared prop, because here
you're squaring the derivatives, and then
you take the square root here at the end.
So finally, just a couple last details
on this algorithm before we move on.
In the next video, we're actually going to
combine RMSprop together with momentum.
So rather than using the hyperparameter
beta, which we had used for momentum,
I'm going to call this hyperparameter
beta 2 just to not clash.
The same hyperparameter for
both momentum and for RMSprop.
And also to make sure that your
algorithm doesn't divide by 0.
What if square root of SdW,
right, is very close to 0.
Then things could blow up.
Just to ensure numerical stability,
when you implement this in practice you
add a very,
very small epsilon to the denominator.
It doesn't really matter
what epsilon is used.
10 to the -8 would be a reasonable
default, but this just ensures slightly
greater numerical stability that for
numerical round off or whatever reason,
that you don't end up dividing by a very,
very small number.
So that's RMSprop, and
similar to momentum, has the effects of
damping out the oscillations in gradient
descent, in mini-batch gradient descent.
And allowing you to maybe use
a larger learning rate alpha.
And certainly speeding up
the learning speed of your algorithm.
So now you know to implement RMSprop,
and this will be another way for
you to speed up your learning algorithm.
One fun fact about RMSprop,
it was actually first proposed not
in an academic research paper, but
in a Coursera course that Jeff Hinton
had taught on Coursera many years ago.
I guess Coursera wasn't intended to
be a platform for dissemination of
novel academic research, but
it worked out pretty well in that case.
And was really from the Coursera course
that RMSprop started to become widely
known and it really took off.
We talked about momentum.
We talked about RMSprop.
It turns out that if you put them
together you can get an even better
optimization algorithm.
Let's talk about that in the next video.